They received reviews on the order of a writer to watch.
But when Kennedy turned in his next novel, Iron Weed, his publisher had lost patience waiting for the writer to watch to turn into a writer who sells.
When it was finally published, Iron Weed went on to win the National Book Critics Circle Award for best novel.
All three Albany novels were optioned for film.
The MacArthur Foundation awarded Kennedy one of its fairy godmother grants, $264,000 over five years, so that Kennedy could write in peace.
Francis Ford Coppola called, asking if Kennedy would help on the dialogue for the movie The Cotton Club.
There's a sweet justice here for the author who was told, in rejection letter after rejection letter, who wants to read about bums, and especially bums in Albany?
A lot of us do.
We, of course, want to talk about your wonderful novels, but before we do, I can't resist.
I have to ask you, if you may, to describe your...
first meeting Saul Bellow down in Puerto Rico, even to describe the school where he was teaching.
I just would love to hear the tale of you handing in fiction to Bellow and what he said to you.
Well, he was advertised in creative writing, and I submitted a partial novel.
I'm called the Angels.
Thalen was created, the Thalen family.
And the fellow read it and took me in as a student before I had met him.
And then we gathered, and he just sat around, and he said something about writing in general.
And he said, a writer one day wakes up and anoints himself as a writer.
And I thought that was a wonderful phrase, you know, to commit yourself to it.
It's a lifetime.
project as an attitude towards the rest of your life.
The first thing he read was very, very encouraging to me and told me it was publishable.
Nobody had ever said anything remotely like that about anything I'd written.
And so we went on and I had faith in that book and did finish it.
It was never published.
It was a very downbeat book.
And it was a
less a novel than it was a collection of stories about various family members, but it had some power, and I think I'll resurrect a bit of it, maybe for a short story.
Anyway, it confirms
that I was going to be a writer, because I was able to finish the book, and the responses I got along the way, I realized there was something there beyond amateur nighting.
And so, you know, in another year or so, I...
I quit journalism and went full-time writing fiction, and that was 1961, and I haven't had a job since.
What's opening once?
Why did you go back?
What would you have lost?
I didn't really intend to stay when I went back.
My father was sick, and my mother had died.
He didn't see a doctor.
So we got him straight.
But he was getting to the point where it looked like he needed some help.
And so we came back.
And also, I had been in Puerto Rico for six years and Miami for a year.
It was time.
I felt it was time to come back into range of New York City or whatever and re-enter the mainland.
But I did come back, and I figured I'd stay a year or two.
I was still a part-time journalist trying to write novels.
But then the very first assignment I got was to write a history of the city, a neighborhood history.
And I started to interview all these people in their 80s and 90s, and it was just one wonderful story after another.
And I began to see the patterns that existed and how my own neighborhood was structured.
I began interviewing my father and my uncles and everybody, everybody I could, who had a memory that preceded my own, I would tap them.
And I wrote that piece over about four months, and that really must have done something to me.
I mean, I just, also, we had a great house we bought from the country, and it was such pleasant living.
I didn't want to go anyplace, though.
Talk about ironweed.
Just ask it to.
This is a continuation of the people in the situation.
The book was, I thought it was more of a
cohesive work than anything I'd done there for.
I felt that I did what I set out to do in creating Francis.
I got closer to him than I ever got to any other person or any other books I wrote.
Your first two novels, there is a narrator
like Jack Haraway in Great Gatsby or like Jack Burton in All the King's Men, who is a more educated, normal person to whom the reader can identify.
He's like an interpreter or a guide for this netherworld of bums and whores and murderers.
And in Iron Weed, the narrator is gone.
We now have Francis Salem, self-described bums, and he is the sensibility through which we see this world.
That was conscious.
I wanted to...
I wanted to explore the various levels of consciousness that I felt Francis was demanding.
This came about.
I didn't want another narrator to intervene in the story in the first place.
I wanted to go right into his mind differently at that time.
And then as I began to tell it, I started to use the best language at my disposal, and...
gradually evolved into another facet of Francis' consciousness, or unconsciousness.
His eloquence, such it is, that comes out of every human being, if you can only find it or have it.
And I felt that when he was, when he sleeps in the barn,
He's a hundred feet away from where he's gone.
that the language there as he froze up to sleep, it began to be as good a thrust of the written word as I was capable of.
Somebody like Legs Diamond, this marvelous gangster, this scion of Albany and all of its tawdry glory, he's basically involved
uh all three times that he's almost shot to death uh in something like a spiritual quest if i understand you he's looking for a balance between what he might be and what he has to do he also uh you talked about the balance and that was one of the things in confronting him
And yet at the same time, Diamond was a very cruel man and a very vicious man.
Put her in some place.
From very early time.
And the balance that did prevail in his life, which was his kind of love of singing and sociality and his ability to balance the women in his life and really put them together, his wife and his girlfriend in the same hotel room, was indicative to me of this curious man who was more than the traditional gangster, which is why I finally was able to
stay with him so long, because he did have that kind of complication.
I kept saying to myself, why are you writing about your character?
And all the way through the writing of that book took six years.
And it was his complexity, finally, that really struck me.
And I mean, he used to read Rabelette and give it away, give copies of Greg Andrew and Panic Rule to his friends.
That's beyond why he did that.
But as long as he did it, I believe that there was something to him which needed to be analyzed.
And I analyzed him into life.
I couldn't stand it anymore.
I finally finished that book.
All of your people believe in justice, too.
They believe that they must make sense, moral sense of what they're doing.
Well, Martin Doherty used a wonderful phrase when he says, talking to the editor of the paper, and says,
It's not sarcasm, it's cynical humanism.
And I thought, cynical humanism.
Would you describe yourself as a cynical humanist?
Somebody, I think, used that phrase back at me in one of the reviews recently.
But it's a wonderful, a lot of people have been searching for something that would describe themselves.
Well, I think that the quest for justice is very important to the people in the books.
That's true.
I think it's important to a lot of us.
I think that's one of the motivating things about writing fiction, that you can make it work out.
You know, you can rejuggle the universe and find a way of righting the wrongs and settling scores and so on.
But I think it's a very...
commonplace desire.
One would hope it's a commonplace desire on the part of all citizens and all human beings, but to present it effectively as fiction as you've done is not at all commonplace.
Thanks very much.
William Kennedy reading from his novel Iron Weed.
Francis decided this would be a fine place to be buried.
If it had a nice flow to it, it carried you down the grass and out onto the river, and then across the water and up through the trees on the far shore to the top of the hill, all in one swoop.
Being dead here would situate a man in place and time.
It would give a man neighbors, even some of them really old folks, like those antique dead ones at the foot of the lawn.
Tobias Banyan, Elisha Skinner,
Elsie Whipple, all crumbling under their limestone headstones, from which the snows, sands, and acids of reduction were slowly removing their names.
But what did the perpetuation of names matter?
Ah, well, there were those for whom death, like life, would always be a burden of eminence.
The progeny of those growing nameless at the foot of the hill were ensured a more durable memory.
Their new and heavier marble stones higher up on the slope had been cut doubly deep so their names would remain visible for an eternity at least.
A program like this appears to be dealing with artifacts or objects called books.
But of course, it's really dealing with invisible essence, imagined people or ideas.